manual/src/main/resources/introduction/the-neo4j-graphdb.asciidoc, before:

[[graphdb-neo4j]]
The Neo4j Graph Database
========================

This chapter goes into more detail on the data model and behavior of Neo4j.

[[graphdb-neo4j-nodes]]
== Nodes ==

The fundamental units that form a graph are nodes and relationships.
In Neo4j, both nodes and relationships can contain <<graphdb-neo4j-properties,properties>>.

Nodes are often used to represent _entities,_ but depending on the domain relationships may be used for that purpose as well.

["dot", "graphdb-nodes-overview.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Node" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Node" -> "Relationships" [label="can have"]
"A Node" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
"Relationships" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
----

Let's start out with a really simple graph, containing only a single node with one property:

["dot", "graphdb-nodes.svg"]
----
"name: Marko"
----


[[graphdb-neo4j-relationships]]
== Relationships ==

Relationships between nodes are a key part of a graph database.
They allow for finding related data.
Just like nodes, relationships can have <<graphdb-neo4j-properties,properties>>.

["dot", "graphdb-rels-overview.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Relationship" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Relationship" -> "Start node" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "End node" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "Relationship type" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
"Relationship type" -> Name [label="uniquely identified by"]
----

A relationship connects two nodes, and is guaranteed to have valid start and end nodes.

["dot", "graphdb-rels.svg"]
----
graph [rankdir="LR"]
"Start node" -> "End node" [label="relationship"]
----

As relationships are always directed, they can be viewed as outgoing or incoming relative to a node, which is useful when traversing the graph:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-dir.svg"]
----
graph [rankdir="LR"]
START [label=""]
MIDDLE [label="Node" fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
END [label=""]
MIDDLE -> END [label="outgoing relationship"]
START -> MIDDLE [label="incoming relationship"]
----

'Relationships are equally well traversed in either direction.'
This means that there is no need to add duplicate relationships in the opposite direction (with regard to traversal or performance).

While relationships always have a direction, you can ignore the direction where it is not useful in your application.

Note that a node can have relationships to itself as well:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-loop.svg"]
----
"Node" -> "Node" [label="loop"]
----

To further enhance graph traversal all relationships have a relationship type.
Note that the word _type_ might be misleading here, you could rather think of it as a _label_.
The following example shows a simple social network with two relationship types.

["dot", "graphdb-rels-twitter.svg"]
----
Maja -> Oscar [label="follows"]
Oscar -> Maja [label="follows"]
Alice -> Oscar [label="follows"]
Oscar -> William [label="blocks" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
----

.Using relationship direction and type
[options="header"]
|========================================================
| What | How
| get who a person follows | outgoing +follows+ relationships, depth one
| get the followers of a person | incoming +follows+ relationships, depth one
| get who a person blocks | outgoing +blocks+ relationships, depth one
| get who a person is blocked by | incoming +blocks+ relationships, depth one
|========================================================


This example is a simple model of a file system, which includes symbolic links:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-filesys.svg"]
----
"/" [ fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"/" -> A
A -> B [label="file"]
A -> C [label="file"]
C -> D [label="file"]
B -> D [label="symbolic link \n{name: \"E\"}" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
----

Depending on what you are looking for, you will use the direction and type of relationships during traversal.

[options="header"]
|========================================================
|What | How
|get the full path of a file | incoming +file+ relationships
|get all paths for a file | incoming +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships
|get all files in a directory | outgoing +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships, depth one
|get all files in a directory, excluding symbolic links | outgoing +file+ relationships, depth one
|get all files in a directory, recursively | outgoing +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships
|========================================================


[[graphdb-neo4j-properties]]
== Properties ==

Both nodes and relationships can have properties.

Properties are key-value pairs where the key is a string.
Property values can be either a primitive or an array of one primitive type.
For example +String+, +int+ and +int[]+ values are valid for properties.

[NOTE]
+null+ is not a valid property value.
Nulls can instead be modeled by the absence of a key.

["dot", "graphdb-properties.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Property" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Property" -> Key [label="has a"]
Key -> Primitive:String [label="is a"]
"A Property" -> Value [label="has a"]
Value -> Primitive [label="can be a"]
Value -> Primitive [label="can be an array of"]
Primitive [shape="record" label="Primitive |{boolean|byte|short|int|long|float|double|char|<String>String}"]
----

[[property-value-types]]
.Property value types
[options="header", cols="15m,45,40"]
|========================================================
|Type | Description | Value range
|boolean| | +true+/+false+
|byte|8-bit integer | +-128+ to +127+, inclusive 
|short|16-bit integer | +-32768+ to +32767+, inclusive
|int| 32-bit integer | +-2147483648+ to +2147483647+, inclusive
|long| 64-bit integer | +-9223372036854775808+ to +9223372036854775807+, inclusive
|float| 32-bit IEEE 754 floating-point number |
|double| 64-bit IEEE 754 floating-point number |
|char| 16-bit unsigned integers representing Unicode characters | +u0000+ to +uffff+ (+0+ to +65535+)
|String| sequence of Unicode characters |
|========================================================

For further details on float/double values, see http://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se5.0/html/typesValues.html#4.2.3[Java Language Specification].

[[graphdb-neo4j-paths]]
== Paths ==

A path is one or more nodes with connecting relationships, typically retrieved as a query or traversal result.

["dot", "graphdb-path.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Path" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Path" -> "Start Node" [label="has a"]
"A Path" -> "Relationship" [label="can contain one or more"]
"Relationship" -> "Node" [label="accompanied by a"]
"A Path" -> "End Node" [label="has an"]
----

The shortest possible path has length zero and looks like this:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example1.svg"]
----
"Node"
----

A path of length one:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example2.svg"]
----
"Node 1" -> "Node 2" [label="Relationship 1"]
----

Another path of length one:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example-loop.svg"]
----
"Node 1" -> "Node 1" [label="Relationship 1"]
----

[[graphdb-neo4j-traversal]]
== Traversal ==

Traversing a graph means visiting its nodes, following relationships according to some rules.
In most cases only a subgraph is visited, as you already know where in the graph the interesting nodes and relationships are found.

Neo4j comes with a callback based traversal API which lets you specify the traversal rules.
At a basic level there's a choice between traversing breadth- or depth-first.

For an in-depth introduction to the traversal framework, see <<tutorial-traversal>>.
For Java code examples see <<tutorials-java-embedded-traversal>>.

Other options to traverse or query graphs in Neo4j are <<cypher-query-lang, Cypher>> and <<gremlin-plugin, Gremlin>>.

Commit message:

Added high level manual entry about labels as part of the data model.

manual/src/main/resources/introduction/the-neo4j-graphdb.asciidoc, after:

[[graphdb-neo4j]]
The Neo4j Graph Database
========================

This chapter goes into more detail on the data model and behavior of Neo4j.

[[graphdb-neo4j-nodes]]
== Nodes ==

The fundamental units that form a graph are nodes and relationships.
In Neo4j, both nodes and relationships can contain <<graphdb-neo4j-properties,properties>>.

Nodes are often used to represent _entities,_ but depending on the domain relationships may be used for that purpose as well.

Apart from properties and relationships, nodes can also be <<graphdb-neo4j-labels,labelled>> with zero or more labels.

["dot", "graphdb-nodes-overview.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Node" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Node" -> "Relationships" [label="can have"]
"A Node" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
"A Node" -> "Labels" [label="can have"]
"Relationships" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
----

Let's start out with a really simple graph, containing only a single node with one property:

["dot", "graphdb-nodes.svg"]
----
"name: Marko"
----


[[graphdb-neo4j-relationships]]
== Relationships ==

Relationships between nodes are a key part of a graph database.
They allow for finding related data.
Just like nodes, relationships can have <<graphdb-neo4j-properties,properties>>.

["dot", "graphdb-rels-overview.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Relationship" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Relationship" -> "Start node" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "End node" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "Relationship type" [label="has a"]
"A Relationship" -> "Properties" [label="can have"]
"Relationship type" -> Name [label="uniquely identified by"]
----

A relationship connects two nodes, and is guaranteed to have valid start and end nodes.

["dot", "graphdb-rels.svg"]
----
graph [rankdir="LR"]
"Start node" -> "End node" [label="relationship"]
----

As relationships are always directed, they can be viewed as outgoing or incoming relative to a node, which is useful when traversing the graph:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-dir.svg"]
----
graph [rankdir="LR"]
START [label=""]
MIDDLE [label="Node" fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
END [label=""]
MIDDLE -> END [label="outgoing relationship"]
START -> MIDDLE [label="incoming relationship"]
----

'Relationships are equally well traversed in either direction.'
This means that there is no need to add duplicate relationships in the opposite direction (with regard to traversal or performance).

While relationships always have a direction, you can ignore the direction where it is not useful in your application.

Note that a node can have relationships to itself as well:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-loop.svg"]
----
"Node" -> "Node" [label="loop"]
----

To further enhance graph traversal all relationships have a relationship type.
Note that the word _type_ might be misleading here, you could rather think of it as a _label_.
The following example shows a simple social network with two relationship types.

["dot", "graphdb-rels-twitter.svg"]
----
Maja -> Oscar [label="follows"]
Oscar -> Maja [label="follows"]
Alice -> Oscar [label="follows"]
Oscar -> William [label="blocks" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
----

.Using relationship direction and type
[options="header"]
|========================================================
| What | How
| get who a person follows | outgoing +follows+ relationships, depth one
| get the followers of a person | incoming +follows+ relationships, depth one
| get who a person blocks | outgoing +blocks+ relationships, depth one
| get who a person is blocked by | incoming +blocks+ relationships, depth one
|========================================================


This example is a simple model of a file system, which includes symbolic links:

["dot", "graphdb-rels-filesys.svg"]
----
"/" [ fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"/" -> A
A -> B [label="file"]
A -> C [label="file"]
C -> D [label="file"]
B -> D [label="symbolic link \n{name: \"E\"}" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
----

Depending on what you are looking for, you will use the direction and type of relationships during traversal.

[options="header"]
|========================================================
|What | How
|get the full path of a file | incoming +file+ relationships
|get all paths for a file | incoming +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships
|get all files in a directory | outgoing +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships, depth one
|get all files in a directory, excluding symbolic links | outgoing +file+ relationships, depth one
|get all files in a directory, recursively | outgoing +file+ and +symbolic link+ relationships
|========================================================


[[graphdb-neo4j-properties]]
== Properties ==

Both nodes and relationships can have properties.

Properties are key-value pairs where the key is a string.
Property values can be either a primitive or an array of one primitive type.
For example +String+, +int+ and +int[]+ values are valid for properties.

[NOTE]
+null+ is not a valid property value.
Nulls can instead be modeled by the absence of a key.

["dot", "graphdb-properties.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Property" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Property" -> Key [label="has a"]
Key -> Primitive:String [label="is a"]
"A Property" -> Value [label="has a"]
Value -> Primitive [label="can be a"]
Value -> Primitive [label="can be an array of"]
Primitive [shape="record" label="Primitive |{boolean|byte|short|int|long|float|double|char|<String>String}"]
----

[[property-value-types]]
.Property value types
[options="header", cols="15m,45,40"]
|========================================================
|Type | Description | Value range
|boolean| | +true+/+false+
|byte|8-bit integer | +-128+ to +127+, inclusive 
|short|16-bit integer | +-32768+ to +32767+, inclusive
|int| 32-bit integer | +-2147483648+ to +2147483647+, inclusive
|long| 64-bit integer | +-9223372036854775808+ to +9223372036854775807+, inclusive
|float| 32-bit IEEE 754 floating-point number |
|double| 64-bit IEEE 754 floating-point number |
|char| 16-bit unsigned integers representing Unicode characters | +u0000+ to +uffff+ (+0+ to +65535+)
|String| sequence of Unicode characters |
|========================================================

For further details on float/double values, see http://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se5.0/html/typesValues.html#4.2.3[Java Language Specification].

[[graphdb-neo4j-labels]]
== Labels ==

[NOTE]
This is a new feature in Neo4j, it is experimental and may still change.
Your feedback on this addition to the model is very welcome.

A label is a named graph construct that is used to group nodes into sets; all nodes labelled with the same label belongs to the same set.
Many database queries can work with these sets instead of the whole graph, making queries easier to write and more efficient.
A node may be labelled with any number of labels, including none, making labels an optional addition to the graph.

["dot", "graphdb-labels.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Label" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Label" -> Name [label="has a"]
"A Label" -> Node [label="groups"]
----

An example would be a label named 'User' that you label all your nodes representing users with.
With that in place, you can ask Neo4j to perform operations only on your user nodes, such as finding all users with a given name.

However, you can use labels for much more.
For instance, since labels can be added and removed during runtime, they can be used to mark temporary states for your nodes.
You might create an "Offline" label for phones that are offline, a "Happy" label for happy pets, and so on.

[[graphdb-neo4j-paths]]
== Paths ==

A path is one or more nodes with connecting relationships, typically retrieved as a query or traversal result.

["dot", "graphdb-path.svg", "meta"]
----
"A Path" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"A Path" -> "Start Node" [label="has a"]
"A Path" -> "Relationship" [label="can contain one or more"]
"Relationship" -> "Node" [label="accompanied by a"]
"A Path" -> "End Node" [label="has an"]
----

The shortest possible path has length zero and looks like this:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example1.svg"]
----
"Node"
----

A path of length one:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example2.svg"]
----
"Node 1" -> "Node 2" [label="Relationship 1"]
----

Another path of length one:

["dot", "graphdb-path-example-loop.svg"]
----
"Node 1" -> "Node 1" [label="Relationship 1"]
----

[[graphdb-neo4j-traversal]]
== Traversal ==

Traversing a graph means visiting its nodes, following relationships according to some rules.
In most cases only a subgraph is visited, as you already know where in the graph the interesting nodes and relationships are found.

Neo4j comes with a callback based traversal API which lets you specify the traversal rules.
At a basic level there's a choice between traversing breadth- or depth-first.

For an in-depth introduction to the traversal framework, see <<tutorial-traversal>>.
For Java code examples see <<tutorials-java-embedded-traversal>>.

Other options to traverse or query graphs in Neo4j are <<cypher-query-lang, Cypher>> and <<gremlin-plugin, Gremlin>>.
