manual/src/main/resources/introduction/what-is-a-graphdb.asciidoc, before:

[[what-is-a-graphdb]]
What is a Graph Database?
=========================

A graph database stores data in a graph, the most generic of data structures, capable of elegantly representing any kind of data in a highly accessible way. 
Let’s follow along some graphs, using them to express graph concepts. 
We’ll ``read'' a graph by following arrows around the diagram to form sentences. 

== A Graph contains Nodes and Relationships ==

____
``A Graph —records data in-> Nodes —which have-> Properties''
____

The simplest possible graph is a single Node, a record that has named values referred to as Properties. 
A Node could start with a single Property and grow to a few million, though that can get a little awkward. 
At some point it makes sense to distribute the data into multiple nodes, organized with explicit Relationships.

["dot", "graphdb-GVE.svg", "meta"]
----
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in" weight=2.0]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in" weight=2.0]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
----

== Relationships organize the Graph ==

____
``Nodes —are organized by-> Relationships —which also have-> Properties''
____

Relationships organize Nodes into arbitrary structures, allowing a Graph to resemble a List, a Tree, a Map, or a compound Entity – any of which can be combined into yet more complex, richly inter-connected structures. 


== Query a Graph with a Traversal ==

____
``A Traversal —navigates-> a Graph; it —identifies-> Paths —which order-> Nodes''
____

A Traversal is how you query a Graph, navigating from starting Nodes to related Nodes according to an algorithm, finding answers to questions like ``what music do my friends like that I don't yet own,'' or ``if this power supply goes down, what web services are affected?''

["dot", "graphdb-traversal.svg", "meta"]
----
Traversal [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Paths [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Algorithm [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in"]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in"]
Traversal -> "Graph" [label="navigates" weight=2.0 color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Traversal -> Paths [label="identifies" weight=2.0 color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Traversal -> Algorithm [label="expresses" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Paths -> Nodes [label="order" weight=2.0]
----


== Indexes look-up Nodes or Relationships ==

____
``An Index —maps from-> Properties —to either-> Nodes or Relationships''
____

Often, you want to find a specific Node or Relationship according to a Property it has.
Rather than traversing the entire graph, use an Index to perform a look-up, for questions like ``find the Account for username master-of-graphs.''

["dot", "graphdb-indexes.svg", "meta"]
----
Indexes [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
Indexes -> Nodes [label="map to" weight=2.0]
Indexes -> Relationships [label="map to" weight=2.0]
Indexes -> Properties [label="map from" weight=2.0]
----

== Neo4j is a Graph Database ==

____
``A Graph Database —manages a-> Graph and —also manages related-> Indexes''
____

Neo4j is a commercially supported open-source graph database.
It was designed and built from the ground-up to be a reliable database, optimized for graph structures instead of tables. 
Working with Neo4j, your application gets all the expressiveness of a graph, with all the dependability you expect out of a database.

["dot", "graphdb-overview.svg", "meta", scaledwidth="75%"]
----
"Graph Database" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Indexes [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
"Graph Database" -> "Graph" [label="manages" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in"]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in"]
"Graph Database" -> Indexes [label="manages" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Indexes -> Nodes [label="map to"]
Indexes -> Relationships [label="map to"]
Indexes -> Properties [label="map from"]  
Traversal -> "Graph" [label="navigates"]
Traversal -> Paths [label="identifies"]
Traversal -> Algorithm [label="expresses"]
Paths -> Nodes [label="order"]
----

Commit message:

Added high level manual entry about labels as part of the data model.

manual/src/main/resources/introduction/what-is-a-graphdb.asciidoc, after:

[[what-is-a-graphdb]]
What is a Graph Database?
=========================

A graph database stores data in a graph, the most generic of data structures, capable of elegantly representing any kind of data in a highly accessible way. 
Let’s follow along some graphs, using them to express graph concepts. 
We’ll ``read'' a graph by following arrows around the diagram to form sentences. 

== A Graph contains Nodes and Relationships ==

____
``A Graph —records data in-> Nodes —which have-> Properties''
____

The simplest possible graph is a single Node, a record that has named values referred to as Properties. 
A Node could start with a single Property and grow to a few million, though that can get a little awkward. 
At some point it makes sense to distribute the data into multiple nodes, organized with explicit Relationships.

["dot", "graphdb-GVE.svg", "meta"]
----
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in" weight=2.0]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in" weight=2.0]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Labels -> Nodes [label="group"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
----

== Relationships organize the Graph ==

____
``Nodes —are organized by-> Relationships —which also have-> Properties''
____

Relationships organize Nodes into arbitrary structures, allowing a Graph to resemble a List, a Tree, a Map, or a compound Entity – any of which can be combined into yet more complex, richly inter-connected structures. 

== Labels group the Nodes ==

____
``Nodes —are grouped by-> Labels —into-> Sets''
____

Labels are a means of grouping the nodes in the graph.
They can be used to restrict queries to subsets of the graph, as well as enabling optional model constraints and indexing rules.


== Query a Graph with a Traversal ==

____
``A Traversal —navigates-> a Graph; it —identifies-> Paths —which order-> Nodes''
____

A Traversal is how you query a Graph, navigating from starting Nodes to related Nodes according to an algorithm, finding answers to questions like ``what music do my friends like that I don't yet own,'' or ``if this power supply goes down, what web services are affected?''

["dot", "graphdb-traversal.svg", "meta"]
----
Traversal [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Paths [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Algorithm [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in"]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in"]
Traversal -> "Graph" [label="navigates" weight=2.0 color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Traversal -> Paths [label="identifies" weight=2.0 color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Traversal -> Algorithm [label="expresses" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Paths -> Nodes [label="order" weight=2.0]
----


== Indexes look-up Nodes or Relationships ==

____
``An Index —maps from-> Properties —to either-> Nodes or Relationships''
____

Often, you want to find a specific Node or Relationship according to a Property it has.
Rather than traversing the entire graph, use an Index to perform a look-up, for questions like ``find the Account for username master-of-graphs.''

["dot", "graphdb-indexes.svg", "meta"]
----
Indexes [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
Indexes -> Nodes [label="map to" weight=2.0]
Indexes -> Relationships [label="map to" weight=2.0]
Indexes -> Properties [label="map from" weight=2.0]
----

== Neo4j is a Graph Database ==

____
``A Graph Database —manages a-> Graph and —also manages related-> Indexes''
____

Neo4j is a commercially supported open-source graph database.
It was designed and built from the ground-up to be a reliable database, optimized for graph structures instead of tables. 
Working with Neo4j, your application gets all the expressiveness of a graph, with all the dependability you expect out of a database.

["dot", "graphdb-overview.svg", "meta", scaledwidth="75%"]
----
"Graph Database" [fillcolor="NODEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Indexes [fillcolor="NODE2HIGHLIGHT"]
Relationships -> Nodes [label="organize"]
Nodes -> Properties [label="have"]
Relationships -> Properties [label="have"]
"Graph Database" -> "Graph" [label="manages" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
"Graph" -> Nodes [label="records data in"]
"Graph" -> Relationships [label="records data in"]
"Graph Database" -> Indexes [label="manages" color="EDGEHIGHLIGHT" fontcolor="EDGEHIGHLIGHT"]
Indexes -> Nodes [label="map to"]
Indexes -> Relationships [label="map to"]
Indexes -> Properties [label="map from"]  
Traversal -> "Graph" [label="navigates"]
Traversal -> Paths [label="identifies"]
Traversal -> Algorithm [label="expresses"]
Paths -> Nodes [label="order"]
----
